adding php context page (#3857)
open-telemetry/opentelemetry.io: content/en/docs/languages/php/context.md

---
title: Context
weight: 55
cSpell:ignore: Swoole

> ---

Reviewer: ```suggestion
description: Learn how context works in instrumented applications.
---
```

Just an example. I miss a bit more of... context.

> In order for OpenTelemetry to work, it must store and propagate important
> telemetry data. For example, when a request is received and a span is started it
> must be available to a component which creates its child span. To solve this
> problem, OpenTelemetry stores the span in the Context.
> 
> More information:
> 
> - [Context specification](/docs/specs/otel/context/)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
OpenTelemetry works by storing and propagating telemetry data. For
example, when an instrumented application receives a request and a
span starts, the span must be available to a component which creates
child spans. To address this need, OpenTelemetry stores the span in
the context.

See the [Context specification](/docs/specs/otel/context/) for more
information on what the context is and does.
```

> on what the context is and does.

Reviewer 2: Hmm, maybe it would actually make more sense to link to either of these targets in the **Concepts** section?

- https://deploy-preview-3857--opentelemetry.netlify.app/docs/concepts/context-propagation/
- https://deploy-preview-3857--opentelemetry.netlify.app/docs/concepts/context-propagation/#context

> on what the context is and does.

Author: Possibly both. The spec page I've linked to defines what the Context API should do (and this page is really talking about our implementation of that API). Context propagation has its own page, https://deploy-preview-3857--opentelemetry.netlify.app/docs/languages/php/propagation/
Perhaps this page really needs to clarify that it's talking about the Context API...

> on what the context is and does.

Author: I decided to just remove the sentence. It's not really related to context propagation, but nor does the average user need to read the spec.

## Context

> Context is globally available, and there can only be one
> [active context](#active-context) in the current execution context. Context can
> store values (for example, a `Span`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Context is globally available, and there can only be one
[active context](#active-context) in the current execution context.
Context can store values (for example, a `Span`).
```

"globally" refers to PHP application scope? OTel scope?

Author: PHP application scope

Author: updated to clarify that it's globally available within a single php execution context

### Storage

Context uses `Storage` to keep track of values. By default, a generic
`ContextStorage` is used. OpenTelemetry for PHP supports other context storage

> for more exotic use-cases (eg for asynchronous/concurrent execution with
> `fibers`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
for less common use cases, like asynchronous or concurrent execution with
`fibers`.
```

> ## Context Keys

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Context keys
```

We use sentence case for title headings.

Context entries are key-value pairs. Keys can be created by calling
`OpenTelemetry\Context\Context::createKey()`.

```php
use OpenTelemetry\Context\Context;

$key1 = Context::createKey('My first key');
$key2 = Context::createKey('My second key');
```

Context keys are used to store and retrieve values from context.

> ## Basic Operations
> 
> ### Store and Retrieve values

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Basic operations

### Store and retrieve values
```

> Values are stored in Context by using the `$context->with($key, $value)` method.
> Setting a context entry creates a new context with the new entry in its storage,
> containing `$value`.
> 
> Context is immutable, and setting a context entry does not modify the previous
> context. Once a value is stored in a context, it can be retrieved via
> `$context->get($key)`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Values are stored in context by using the `$context->with($key, $value)` method.
Setting a context entry creates a new context with the new entry in its storage,
containing `$value`.

Context is immutable, and setting a context entry does not modify the previous
context. Once a value is stored in a context, it can be retrieved using
`$context->get($key)`:
```

@svrnm Not sure if we're to follow the K8s way here and capitalize entities from the specs, like Context. Was this ever discussed? Wouldn't want to miss on something here.

Author: I did capitalize it because it's a key OTEL term...

Reviewer 3: let's keep it capitalized, @theletterf we might add a list of that in the style guide

> Values are stored in Context by using the `$context->with($key, $value)` method.
> Setting a context entry creates a new context with the new entry in its storage,
> containing `$value`.
> 
> Context is immutable, and setting a context entry does not modify the previous
> context. Once a value is stored in a context, it can be retrieved via
> `$context->get($key)`:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Context is immutable. Setting a context entry creates a new context with the new entry in its storage: `$context->with($key, $value)`. Retrieve values using `$context->get($key)`, for example:
```

```php
use OpenTelemetry\Context\Context;

$key = Context::createKey('some key');

// add a new entry
$ctx2 = Context::getCurrent()->with($key, 'context 2');

// ctx2 contains the new entry
var_dump($ctx2->get($key)); // "context 2"

// active context is unchanged
var_dump(Context::getCurrent()->get($key)); // NULL
```

If a value is not found in the current context, then each parent is checked
until either the key is found, or the root context is reached.

> ## Active Context

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Active context
```

The active context is the context which is returned by `Context::getCurrent()`.
The context object contains entries which allow telemetry components to

> communicate with each other. For example, when a span is created it may be
> activated, which creates a new active context and stores the span. Later, when
> another span is created it may use the span from the active context as its
> parent span. If no context is active, the root context is returned, which is
> just the empty context object.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
communicate with each other. For example, when a span is created it can be
activated, which creates a new active context and stores the span. Later, when
another span is created it can use the span from the active context as its
parent span. If no context is active, the root context is returned, which is
just the empty context object.
```

> just the empty context object.

Reviewer 2: The reader was already exposed to `Context::getCurrent()` in the previous section, so I'd suggest the following section reorg:

> ## Context keys
> ## Active context
> ## Set and get context values
> ## Activate a context
> ## Scope
> ...
> ## Nested contexts
> ## Context in asynchronous environments

WDYT?

Author: > WDYT?

Done. I think it flows a lot better now, thanks.

```php
use OpenTelemetry\Context\Context;

// Returns the active context
// If no context is active, the root context is returned
$context = Context::getCurrent();
```

### Set Active Context

A context can be made active by calling `$context->activate()`.

```php
use OpenTelemetry\Context\Context;

$key = Context::createKey('my-key');
$ctx = Context::getCurrent();
$ctx2 = $ctx->with($key, 'context 2');
$ctx2->activate();
assert($ctx2 === Context::getCurrent());
```

#### Scope

> The return value of `$context->activate()` is a `Scope`. You must `detach()` the
> scope to "de-activate" that context, which will make the previously-active
> context the active context again.
> 
> The return value of `$scope->detach()` is an integer. A zero return value means
> that the scope was successfully detached. A non-zero value means that the call
> was unexpected; either the context associated with the scope was:
> 
> - already detached
> - not a part of the current execution context
> - not the active context

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The return value of `$context->activate()` is a `Scope`. You must `detach()` the
scope to deactivate that context, which reactivates the previously-active context.

The return value of `$scope->detach()` is an integer. A return value of `0` means
that the scope was successfully detached. A non-zero value means that the call
was unexpected and that the context associated with the scope was:

- Already detached
- Not a part of the current execution context
- Not the active context
```

#### DebugScope

> To assist developers in locating issues with context and scope, there is
> `DebugScope`. In development (that is, a PHP runtime with assertions enabled),
> an activated `Context` will be wrapped in a `DebugScope`. The `DebugScope` keeps
> track of when the scope was activated, and has a destructor which triggers an
> error if the scope was not detached. The error output contains a backtrace of
> which code activated the context.
> 
> The following code would trigger an error, complaining that a scope was not
> detached, and giving a backtrace of where the scope was created:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To assist developers in locating issues with context and scope, there is
`DebugScope`. In development, with a PHP runtime with assertions enabled,
an activated `Context` is wrapped in a `DebugScope`. The `DebugScope` keeps
track of when the scope was activated, and has a destructor which triggers an
error if the scope was not detached. The error output contains a backtrace of
which code activated the context.

The following code would trigger an error, complaining that a scope was not
detached, and giving a backtrace of where the scope was created:
```

```php
use OpenTelemetry\Context\Context;

$key = Context::createKey('my-key');
$scope = Context::getCurrent()->with($key, 'value')->activate();

//exit without detaching $scope
```

> This can be problematic in some situations, particularly in legacy applications
> which might `exit` or `die` - any active spans will not be completed and
> exported, but the `DebugScope` will also complain loudly.
> 
> If you understand why `DebugScope` is complaining and accept the risks, then you
> can disable the feature entirely by setting `OTEL_PHP_DEBUG_SCOPES_DISABLED` to
> a truthy value.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This can be problematic in some situations, particularly in legacy applications
which might `exit` or `die`. In that case, active spans are not completed and
exported, and the `DebugScope` complains loudly.

If you understand why `DebugScope` is complaining and accept the risks, then you
can disable the feature entirely by setting `OTEL_PHP_DEBUG_SCOPES_DISABLED` to
a truthy value.
```

Can we be more specific as to what "complains loudly" means or is noticed? Perhaps a log sample?

> ### Nested Context

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Nested context
```

> Active context executions may be nested, and this is how traces can have nested

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Active context executions can be nested. This is how traces can have nested
```

spans:

```php
use OpenTelemetry\Context\Context;

$key = Context::createKey('my-key');

var_dump(Context::getCurrent()->get($key)); //NULL
$scope2 = Context::getCurrent()->with($key, 'context 2')->activate();
var_dump(Context::getCurrent()->get($key)); //'context 2'
$scope3 = Context::getCurrent()->with($key, 'context 3')->activate();
var_dump(Context::getCurrent()->get($key)); //'context 3'

$scope3->detach(); //context 2 is active
$scope2->detach(); //original context is active
var_dump(Context::getCurrent()->get($key)); //NULL
```

### Asynchronous context

For asynchronous PHP programming, for example `Swoole` or the Fiber-based

> `Revolt` event loop, there can be multiple active `Context`s, but still only one

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`Revolt` event loop, there can be multiple active contexts, but still only one
```

active context per execution context.

> For fiber-based implementations, `Context` will be associated with the active
> fiber, and will fork, switch and be destroyed as appropriate by hooking in to
> PHP's fiber initialization, forking and destruction handlers.
> 
> For other async implementations, custom context storage may be needed to
> interoperate correctly. Check the [registry](/ecosystem/registry/?language=php)
> for storage implementations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For fiber-based implementations, `Context` is associated with the active
fiber, and forks, switches and is destroyed as appropriate by hooking into
PHP's fiber initialization, forking, and destruction handlers.

For other async implementations, custom context storage might be needed to
interoperate correctly. Check the [registry](/ecosystem/registry/?language=php)
for storage implementations.
```
